Add releases to new doc hub (#2662)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/overview/fleet-management/cluster-management/cluster-concepts/releases/index.md

  - How are workload cluster releases announced?
  - What is a pre-release?
  - What is an alpha release?
  - What is a beta release?
  - What is a release candidate?
aliases:
  - /platform-overview/cluster-management/releases
  - /reference/workload-cluster-release-versions/
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-tenet
---

Our workload cluster releases define the capabilities of the clusters you create in your installations. Here we explain the semantics of our versioning and give details on workload cluster release on certain providers.

## Introduction

Throughout the lifecycle of a cluster, you first have the option to select a workload cluster release when creating the cluster. Later you are likely to upgrade the cluster from release to release. Understanding the differences of Major, Minor and Patch releases and their impact is crucial.

Each workload cluster release bundles a stack of components with their specific versions. The workload cluster release itself is distinguished by the provider it is made for (AWS, Azure, or KVM) and the version number, which follows the [Semver](https://semver.org/) standard.

> We test workload cluster releases as a whole. To upgrade a component to a newer version, the entire cluster is upgrade to a new workload cluster release. This is our best way to ensure that all components in the cluster interoperate well.

Author: ```suggestion
We test workload cluster releases as a whole. To upgrade a component to a newer version, the entire cluster is upgraded to a new workload cluster release. This is our best way to ensure that all elements in the cluster interact well.
```

## Conventions around release versioning {#versioning-conventions}

> The Semver standard specifies version numbers in the form of `Major.Minor.Patch`.

Author: ```suggestion
The SemVer standard specifies version numbers in the form of `Major.Minor.Patch`.
```

Each new workload cluster release defines a set of changes with regard to exactly one previous workload cluster release. The nature or impact of the changes influence the version number of the new release.

### Major version {#major}

> The Kubernetes project provides the most important component of our workload clusters. So we align our workload cluster release versioning with the Kubernetes releases.
> 
> **Convention**: For each new _minor_ Kubernetes release we provide a new _major_ workload cluster release version.
> 
> The following table shows which of our major releases contain which Kubernetes release.
> 
> | Release version | Kubernetes version | Availability |
> |:---------------------------:|:------------------:|:------------:|
> | **28.x.x**                  | 1.28.x             | Available    |
> | **29.x.x**                  | 1.29.x             | Available    |
> | **30.x.x**                  | 1.30.x             | Available    |
> | **31.x.x**                  | 1.31.x             | Available    |
> | **32.x.x**                  | 1.32.x             | Available    |

Author: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes project provides the most critical component of our workload clusters. So we align our workload cluster release versioning with the Kubernetes releases.

**Convention**: For each new _minor_ Kubernetes release we provide a new _major_ workload cluster release version.

For example, the cluster release **28.x.x** will include a Kubernetes version of 1.28.x. 
```

- [cilium](https://github.com/giantswarm/cilium-app)
- [cilium-servicemonitors](https://github.com/giantswarm/cilium-servicemonitors-app)
- [coredns](https://github.com/giantswarm/coredns-app)
- [coredns-extensions](https://github.com/giantswarm/coredns-extensions-app)
- [ETCD-defrag](https://github.com/giantswarm/etcd-defrag-app)
- [ETCD-k8s-resources-count](https://github.com/giantswarm/etcd-kubernetes-resources-count-exporter)
- [external-dns](https://github.com/giantswarm/external-dns-app)
- [k8s-audit-metrics](https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-audit-metrics)
- [k8s-dns-node-cache](https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-dns-node-cache-app)
- [metrics-server](https://github.com/giantswarm/metrics-server-app)
- [net-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/net-exporter)
- [network-policies](https://github.com/giantswarm/network-policies-app)
- [node-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/node-exporter-app)
- [observability-bundle](https://github.com/giantswarm/observability-bundle)
- [alloy-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/alloy-app)
- [prometheus-operator-crd](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-operator-crd)

>   * [kube-prometheus-stack-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/kube-prometheus-stack-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [kube-prometheus-stack-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/kube-prometheus-stack-app)
```

### Lifecycle {#lifecycle}

For every provider, we maintain at least **two major versions** of workload cluster releases simultaneously, so you have two different Kubernetes minor versions to choose from.

With our development of **new functionality** we focus on our latest major version. The older major version is mostly maintained to fix security issues and stability problems.

Workload cluster releases get [deprecated](#deprecation) when replaced by newer ones. After deprecation, and once no longer in use by any customer, a workload cluster release is archived, which means that it's no longer accessible to you.

### Deprecation {#deprecation}

Once we've released a new workload cluster release, whether it's major, minor, or patch, we usually deprecate an older version.

- As soon as we publish a new major release, we can deprecate all active releases in the two major versions preceding it, since they're no longer needed as an upgrade path.
- When we release a new minor or patch version, we deprecate the previous version. For example, when 31.1.0 comes out, the previous version 31.0.1 gets deprecated.

> Once deprecated, you can still keep using the workload cluster release with existing clusters. In addition, as long as you have at least one cluster in your installation running the deprecated release, you can also create new clusters using that release. This allows you to create test clusters to test an upgrade from that release.

Author: ```suggestion
Once deprecated, you can continue to use the workload cluster release with existing clusters. Also, as long as you have at least one cluster in your installation running the deprecated release, you can also create new clusters using that release. This allows you to create test clusters to test an upgrade from that release.
```

- Using the [`kubectl gs get release`]({{< relref "/vintage/platform-overview/web-interface/" >}}) command, you can get more information about the workload cluster releases available in your installation. This command lists all available workload cluster releases, their versions, and the Kubernetes version they contain.

### Default applications {#apps}

#### All providers

- [capi-node-labeler](https://github.com/giantswarm/capi-node-labeler-app)
- [cert-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-exporter)
- [cert-manager](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-manager-app)
- [chart-operator-extensions](https://github.com/giantswarm/chart-operator-extensions)
- [cilium](https://github.com/giantswarm/cilium-app)
- [cilium-servicemonitors](https://github.com/giantswarm/cilium-servicemonitors-app)
- [coredns](https://github.com/giantswarm/coredns-app)
- [coredns-extensions](https://github.com/giantswarm/coredns-extensions-app)
- [etcd-defrag](https://github.com/giantswarm/etcd-defrag-app)

> - [etcd-k8s-res-count-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/etcd-kubernetes-resources-count-exporter)

Author: ```suggestion
- [ETCD-k8s-resources-count](https://github.com/giantswarm/etcd-kubernetes-resources-count-exporter)
```

- [external-dns](https://github.com/giantswarm/external-dns-app)
- [k8s-audit-metrics](https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-audit-metrics)
- [k8s-dns-node-cache](https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-dns-node-cache-app)
- [metrics-server](https://github.com/giantswarm/metrics-server-app)
- [net-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/net-exporter)
- [network-policies](https://github.com/giantswarm/network-policies-app)
- [node-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/node-exporter-app)
- [observability-bundle](https://github.com/giantswarm/observability-bundle)
  * [alloy-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/alloy-app)

>   * [prometheus-operator-crd](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-operator-crd)

Author: ```suggestion
- [prometheus-operator-crd](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-operator-crd)
```

  * [kube-prometheus-stack-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/kube-prometheus-stack-app)

>   * [prometheus-agent](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-agent-app)
>   * [promtail-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/promtail-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [prometheus-agent](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-agent-app)
- [promtail-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/promtail-app)
```

>   * [grafana-agent-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/grafana-agent-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [grafana-agent-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/grafana-agent-app)
```

- [observability-policies](https://github.com/giantswarm/observability-policies-app)
- [prometheus-blackbox-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/prometheus-blackbox-exporter-app)
- [security-bundle](https://github.com/giantswarm/security-bundle)
  * [cloudnative-pg](https://github.com/giantswarm/cloudnative-pg-app)

>   * [edgedb](https://github.com/giantswarm/edgedb-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [edgedb](https://github.com/giantswarm/edgedb-app)
```

>   * [exception-recommender](https://github.com/giantswarm/exception-recommender)
>   * [falco](https://github.com/giantswarm/falco-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [exception-recommender](https://github.com/giantswarm/exception-recommender)
- [falco](https://github.com/giantswarm/falco-app)
```

>   * [jiralert](https://github.com/giantswarm/jiralert-app)
>   * [kyverno](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [jiralert](https://github.com/giantswarm/jiralert-app)
- [kyverno](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-app)
```

>   * [kyverno-crds](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-crds)
>   * [kyverno-policy-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-policy-operator)

Author: ```suggestion
- [kyverno-crds](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-crds)
- [kyverno-policy-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-policy-operator)
```

  * [kyverno-policies](https://github.com/giantswarm/kyverno-policies)
  * [policy-api-crds](https://github.com/giantswarm/policy-api-crds)
  * [reports-server](https://github.com/giantswarm/reports-server-app)

>   * [starboard-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/starboard-exporter)
>   * [trivy](https://github.com/giantswarm/trivy-app)
>   * [trivy-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/trivy-operator-app)

Author: ```suggestion
- [starboard-exporter](https://github.com/giantswarm/starboard-exporter)
- [trivy](https://github.com/giantswarm/trivy-app)
- [trivy-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/trivy-operator-app)
```

- [aws-nth-bundle](https://github.com/giantswarm/aws-nth-bundle)
- [aws-pod-identity-webhook](https://github.com/giantswarm/aws-pod-identity-webhook)
- [cert-manager-crossplane-resources](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-manager-crossplane-resources)
- [cilium-crossplane-resources](https://github.com/giantswarm/cilium-crossplane-resources)
- [cloud-provider-aws](https://github.com/giantswarm/aws-cloud-controller-manager-app)
- [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/giantswarm/cluster-autoscaler-app)
- [irsa-servicemonitors](https://github.com/giantswarm/irsa-servicemonitors-app)
- [karpenter-bundle](https://github.com/giantswarm/karpenter-bundle)
- [karpenter-nodepools](https://github.com/giantswarm/karpenter-nodepools)

### Azure

- [azure-cloud-controller-manager](https://github.com/giantswarm/azure-cloud-controller-manager-app)
- [azure-cloud-node-manager](https://github.com/giantswarm/azure-cloud-node-manager-app)
- [azuredisk-csi-driver](https://github.com/giantswarm/azuredisk-csi-driver-app)
- [azurefile-csi-driver](https://github.com/giantswarm/azurefile-csi-driver-app)

> ### VSphere

Author: ```suggestion
### vSphere
```

We test every new major workload cluster release, bringing a new Kubernetes minor release, against the CNCF [conformance test suite](https://github.com/cncf/k8s-conformance).
Every workload cluster release, from patch to major, also undergoes automated integration testing.

A major workload cluster release may contain other important changes, apart from a new Kubernetes release. Check the [Details about releases and features](#release-details) section for more information.

### Minor version {#minor}

We increase (bump) the minor version number when a workload cluster release adds new functionality, while maintaining the functionality of the stack as it was in the previous version. This can include minor upgrades of third party components, except for Kubernetes.

### Patch version {#patch}

The general rule for patch releases is that they have zero impact on customers and do not require rolling nodes. They are used to fix a problem in the predecessor (bugfix or security fix), implement temporary mitigations, or make other changes that do not require customer action.

### Lifecycle {#lifecycle}

> For every provider, we maintain **two major versions** of workload cluster releases at the same time, which means that you have two different Kubernetes minor versions to chose from.

Author: ```suggestion
For every provider, we maintain at least **two major versions** of workload cluster releases simultaneously, which means you have two different Kubernetes minor versions to choose from.
```

With our development of **new functionality** we focus on our latest major version. The older major version is mostly maintained to fix security issues and stability problems.

Old workload cluster releases get [deprecated](#deprecation) when replaced by newer ones. After deprecation, and once no longer in use by any customer, a workload cluster release gets archived, which means that it is no longer accessible to you.

### Deprecation {#deprecation}

Once we provide a new workload cluster release, be it major, minor, or patch, we usually deprecate an older version.

> - When we release a new major version, we deprecate all remaining workload cluster release in the oldest major version (to have only two major versions maintained).

Author: ```suggestion
- As soon as we publish a new major release, we can deprecate all active releases in the two major versions preceding it, as none of them are needed as an upgrade path anymore.
```

Currently not all Giant Swarm releases become available as pre-releases. We communicate pre-releases, when they are available for customer testing.

Pre-releases can be alpha, beta, or release candidates (RC). This depends on the needs of the team wanting to test their feature.

Use Cases for Pre-Releases:

- A new feature with unclear impact is done and the team wants to test and evaluate its impact before deciding the scope of the release (alpha). Customers get early access to the functionality and see if it satisfies their requirements. Customers report back with bugs and additional commentary. This allows the functionality to be evaluated in a less controlled way than in our testing environments. It also identifies bugs that we may have not found, allowing us to fix them early. It also may bring about reconsidering the feature/solution in general.

- A new high impact feature is done, but needs to wait for the next major release (beta). Customers get early access to the functionality and see that it sits well with their set-up. Customers report back with bugs as necessary. This allows us to make fixes to bugs that we may have not found.

> - A new high-impact feature is done and is urgently needed by a customer (release candidate `rc`). The customer can get a pre-release to test and roll out ASAP. This release is complete and stable. It may not meet the quality bars of a general availability (GA) release.

Author: ```suggestion
- A new high-impact feature is done and is urgently needed by a customer (release candidate `rc`). The customer can get a pre-release to test and roll out as soon as possible. This release is complete and stable. It may not meet the quality bars of a general availability (GA) release.
```
